---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 33"
date:   2017-03-31
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- axiomatic semantics pt. 2
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---

## Assertions con't

Think of `A` as the set of states where assertion `A` is true

* $ A \supset B$ means `A` is a subset of `B`
* `A and B` is the intersection of A and B
* `A or B` is the union of A and B

## While loop

After the loop, we know that `not B` must be the case. We have: 

```
while B do S = 
if B then {S; while B do S} else skip
```
Doesn't tell us that the loop terminates!

This becomes
```
{P}
if B then {S; while B do S} else skip
{~B and Q}
```

Using rule for if-statement, this is

```
{P and B} S; while B do S {~B and Q}, P and ~B $\supset$ ~B and Q
---
{P} while B do S {~B and Q}
```

Loop invariants $\rightarrow$ true before and after executing loops. Solution to a fixed point equation.

For assignment and if-statements, given a postcondition, we can always calculate the weakest precondition by starting with the postcondition and applying axioms. Can't do this with loop invariants.

## Termination

**Partial correctness**: nontermination allowed. **Total correctness**: termination required. Old-fashioned perspective.

**Well founded set**: A set with a partial order is well founded if there are no infinitely decreasing sequences of distinct elements from the set. E.g., the Natural numbers (no negatives).

To prove a loop terminates (i.e., proving total correctness), define a *variant function* which takes values from a well founded set. Show that each loop iteration decreases the value of the variant function or establishes $\neg B$. Since the variant function can't decrease forever, the loop must terminate. 

Let **I** be a loop invariant. 

{%
    include image.html
    img="/img/PLP/axiomatic-semantics-while-loop.png"
    caption="While loop with loop"
%}

{%
    include image.html
    img="/img/PLP/axiomatic-semantics-while-loop-2.png"
    caption="While loop with loop"
%}

Often times, will need to come up with a loop invariant when trying to prove termination. How to do this? Guess! Take the **guard** of the loop, (e.g., while *guard* do S), delete the conjuct in the post-condition that represents the negation of the guard. What's left is the loop invariant.