---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 23"
date:   2017-02-27
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- functional programming (SML)
---
---
# SML

Begin learning [Standard ML](http://www.smlnj.org/sml.html).

## Elements of ML

Build lists using `[]` or the `cons` operator, which is `::`. 

```
[];
4::[];
```

Produces a `list int` containing 4. 

ML is a functional programming language: programs are functions (functions have types), running a program is evaluating an expression, no side effects in expressions (*referential transparency*).

`val` is a keyword for declaring a new variable and binding it to a value. 

```
val z = 3;
val y = z + 1;
val z = 1;
y; 
```
The last line produces 4. This isn't an assignment; `y` retains the value it was initially given. ML doesn't re-evaluate it when `z` changes.

## Types of functions 

* `->` is used for types of functions.
* it associates right; `int -> int -> int` means `int -> (int -> int)`.

**Know how to specify right and left associativity in a grammar for the midterm!**

## Functions

`val fname = (fn x => x+1);`

* `val` introduces a new name
* `fn` introduces a new function definition-this is the function of `x` that returns `x+1`

## Recursion

`val rec` defines a recursive function. `fun fname(...);` is syntactic sugar for `val rec fname = fn(...);`.

## Pattern Matching

```
fun toString 0 = "zero"
    | toString 1 = "one"
    | toString 2 = "two";
```
The language starts at the top and evaluates each case. An underscore `_` matches anything.

### Pattern matching on lists

```
fun sumList [] = 0
    | sumList (x::xs) = x + sumList xs;
```
This is an `fn : int list -> int`.

```
fun size [] = 0
    | size (x::xs) = 1 + size xs;
```
This is a  `fn : 'a list -> int`.
`'a` is a type variable. `'a list` is a list of any type, and so `size` is a polymorphic function.

## Higher order functions

Takes other functions as arguments or returns functions. 

```
fun incby x y = x + y
```
This is a `fn : int -> int -> int`. 
You can partially evaluate it with e.g., `incby 2`! This returns a function `fn : int -> int`. 

ML assumes the type of `int`. To use reals, need to specify `fun incby (x::real) y = x + y`.

```
fun map f [] = []
    | map f (x::xs) = (f x) :: map f xs
```
This is a `val map = fn: ('a -> 'b) -> 'a list -> 'b list`.

f takes an `x` of type `'a` and produces something of type `'b`. Then this "cons'd" with a list of `'b` things. The intermediate `'a list` represents the second argument of `map`, which contains the remaining `'a` things that need to get "mapped".