---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 1"
date:   2017-01-04
category: lecture-notes
keywords: 
- introduction
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---

## Administrivia

1 major project. 7 parts.

1. Scanner
2. Parser
3. Abstract Syntax Tree
4. Type Checking
5. Code Generation 1
6. Code Generation 2
7. Fix errors and submit

Will generate java byte code. Grading will be done on junit tests. 

## Notes

Reading: Scott, CH 1

### What makes languages successfull? 

* Expressive power
    * Most programming languages are Turing complete! *What does this mean?* We'll find out next semester in Formal Languages :)
* Ease of implementation and availability
* Ease of use for novice
* Standardization
* Excellent Compilers
    * Fortran has a good compiler which has kept it alive. At some point, look this up? 
* Economics, patronage, and inertia 

### Declarative and Imperative Languages

**Imperative**: Like Java, C++, etc. Have a notion of variables whose values you update.

**Declarative**: Functional, logic, query languages. 

More on this later. 

### Compilation

In a nutshell- **a compiler translates a source program to an equivalent program in a target language.** Output is called object code when written to a file in a form understood by the OS. 

Preprocessors remove comments and expand macros, and may delete code to allow for conditional compilation. 

Linkers are for linking to external libraries. 

### Interpreters 

Essentially implement a virtual machine. Fetches, analyzes, and executes source code (more or less) one instruction at a time. 

Can be combined with compilation. 

### Example: Java

Early implementations compiled Java source with javac to create byte code. This was interpreted by the JVM. The JVM simulated a stack oriented machine. Has exceptions, threads, and other fancy features.

Currently, java source code is compiled via javac to byte code. This gets interpreted or gets compiled again by a "just in time" (JIT) compiler, which generates machine code. 
