---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 41"
date:   2017-04-19
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- Scripting
---

Need to know about Perl w.r.t. what we talked about in "scope" discussion. Also NTK what we talk about Groovy and Lua in slides.

## Scripting languages

* "glue languages" - combining existing components written in fast, compiled languages
* web scripting
* extension languages - extend functionality of "scriptable" tools

Design choices are usually flexibility, rapid development, local customization, and dynamic error detection. 

## History

Two sets of ancestors

* command interpreters like JCL and MS-DOS, sh, csh
* tools for text processing and report generation such as RPG, sed, awk

## Characteristics

* Lack of declarations, simple scope rules. Different languages handle local vs global vars differently
* Flexible dynamic typing
* Easy access to other programs

## Groovy

* Compiles straight to Java bytecode, so works cleanly with all existing Java objects and libraries 
* Closures

Ex.
```Groovy
// initiate variables
int x, y;
x = 2;
// create closure and assign it to variable C
def c = {n -> n * n}
// using C as the ident for the closure
// make a call on that closure
y = c.call(x);
// y will equal 4
```

Recall that a closure may reference any variables defined within its enclosing lexical scope. Any such variable is said to be bound to the closure. Closures are first class objects in Groovy. A closure may be *curried* so that a copy of the closure is made w/ one or more of its params fixed to a constant value.

Similar w.r.t. our project in how they mapped constructs to Java byte code.

## Lua

Lua 5.0 came out in 2005 with a register based virtual machine (before was stack-based) and co-routines.

## Design goals

* Simplicity
* Efficiency- fast compilation (one pass compiler!). Our language from the project was done in multiple passes.
* Portability - clean ANSI C implementation of virtual machine. Also compiles as C++

## Implementation

* hand-written scanner
* hand-written recursive descent parser- smaller, more efficient, more portable, fully reentrant, provides better error messages! But if you were designing a language that may be changing in the future, should generate with `yacc` etc
* No intermediate representation - emits VM instructions on-the-fly

## Types and Values

Dynamically typed - types attached to values rather than variables. Types include

* nil
* boolean
* number - double precision floating point, can select float or long 
* string
* table - associative arrays
* function
* userdata - pointers to user memory blocks. *heavy* - allocated by lua and garbage collected. *light* - allocated and freed by user
* thread - coroutine

Values are represented as unions in C.

## Table implementation

Originally a hash table. Lua 5.0 introduced hybrid structure with optimization for arrays starting at 1. Has hash part and array part. 

## Threads and coroutines

* asymmetric coroutines
* create, resume, yield (suspends execution of running coroutine and returns control to the call that resumed that coroutine. Stackful - stack saved when coroutine is suspended)
* can be used for cooperative multithreading (control only switches when you want it to), generators, symmetric coroutines