---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 6"
date:   2017-01-18
category: lecture-notes
keywords: 
- parsing pt. 2
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---

## Predict Sets

* Tells us whether grammar is LL(1) or not. Just compute the predict set for each production and check the disjoint property!
* Used during parsing to choose a production

## Left Recursion

Left recursion makes a grammar non-LL(1). A production of the form

$$
A ::= A \sigma \hspace{5pt} | \hspace{5pt} \beta 
$$

can be replaced in the grammer with 

$$
\begin{align}
A &::= \beta B \nonumber \\
B &::= \sigma B \hspace{5pt} | \hspace{5pt} \epsilon \nonumber
\end{align}
$$

This is an equivalent grammar without left-recursion. The same sentences can be generated. 
An example: 

	ident_list ::= ident | ident_list, ident 

becomes

	ident_list ::= ident ident_list_tail
	ident_list_tail ::= , ident ident_list_tail | $\epsilon$

You can also transform to EBNF: 

$$
A ::= \beta \sigma *
$$

Need to be somewhat careful when applying transformations. Losing the left-recursion via transformations can cause unintended loss of information that changes the intention of the grammar. 

## More non-LL(1) examples

Consider

$$
A ::= \alpha \beta \hspace{5pt} | \hspace{5pt} \alpha \gamma.
$$

This can be transformed using left factorization

$$
\begin{align}
A &::= \alpha \beta \nonumber \\
B &::= \beta \hspace{5pt} | \hspace{5pt} \gamma. \nonumber
\end{align}
$$

Can write this as

$$
A ::= \alpha ( \beta \hspace{5pt} | \hspace{5pt} \gamma ).
$$

## How can me make a parser?

* Given an LL(1) grammar, we can systematically construct a *recursive descent parser*.
* Our first parser will only recognize whether or not a sentence is legal.
* Later we'll construct a syntax tree
* Compute the predict sets for each production
* Rewrite the grammar so that each non-terminal is on the left side of exactly one production
* For each non-terminal A, we will have a method void A() to parse that symbol