---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 21"
date:   2017-02-22
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- structured control flow
---
---
## Structured vs Unstructured flow

* unstructured control flow uses `goto` statement. Used in Fortran, causes spaghetti code
* structured flow use only sequencing, selection, and iteration 

Structured flow aims to avoid *non-local branching*. This occurs when you branch to label outside current subroutine. Requires unwinding the stack (deallocate stack frames, restore registers, etc.). 

## Continuations

Abstraction that captures a context where execution might continue. This is a generalization of non-local gotos that unwind the stack. Are first-class values in some languages, such as Scheme. Will return to this later.

## Sequencing

Central to imperative programming. Generally implemented as a delimited list of statements wherever a statement is expected, e.g., between `begin` and `end` keywords. Not really present in functional languages. 

## Selection

Generally `if-then-else` statement. Although condition is Boolean expression, need not store the value in a register- instead can generate jump code to do comparison and then branch.

Rather than testing each case sequentially, the `case` statement may compute the address of the jump target. Can use:

* Jump table - T[expr] gives address to jump for that value of expression. Need an entry for every possible value.
* Sequential testing if # of values is small
* Hash table works well if possible range of `case` statement is large
* Binary search
* Multiple lookup strategies

## Iteration

Need iteration or recursion in order to be Turing complete! 

Enumeration controlled loops: know ahead of time number of iterations to loop for b/c looping over a set.

*Iterators* - separate the way to enumerate objects from the loop control. Java has [Iterator](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Iterator.html). Java also converts `for-each` loop to an Iterator. 

Logically controlled loops: execute until some condition is true. 

## Parallel loops

Computing sequential loops in parallel. OpenMP is a set of compiler directives (C, C++, FORTRAN) for parallelism. Iterations will be divided up between the available processors. 

```C++

double Res[1000];
#pragma omp parallel for
for(int i = 0; i < 10000; ++i) {
	Res[i] *= 2;
}
```