---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 24"
date:   2017-03-01
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- functional programming (SML)
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---
## Curried Functions

A function of n arguments that is viewed as a function of one argument that returns a function of n-1 arguments. 

Example: 

```
fun incby x y = x + y
```
This is `val incby = fn: int -> int -> int`.

Consider this example: 
```
fun curry f x y = f(x,y); 
```
If $f$: $\alpha$; $x$: $\beta$; $y$: $\gamma$; $f(x,y)$: $\delta$

Then, **curry**: $\alpha \rightarrow \beta \rightarrow \gamma \rightarrow \delta$. Rewriting in terms of $f(x,y)$, this is **curry**: $((\beta * \gamma) \rightarrow \delta) \rightarrow \beta \rightarrow \gamma \rightarrow \delta$. 

*function application associates to the left!*

## Defining functions

This function should return first `j` elements of a list, return `[]` if `j` $\leq$ `0`, and return `[]` if `arglist` is less than `j`. 

```
fun take 0 arglist = []
	| take j (x::xs) = x :: (take (j-1) xs)
	| take j [] = [];
```
Can also use an `if-then-else` construct. 

```
fun take j [] = []
    | take j (x::xs) = 
        if j > 0
        then x::( take (j-1) xs)
        else [];
```

## Non-exhaustive match warnings

When cases in pattern-matching are non-exhaustive, potential for run-time errors. SML shows warnings.

## foldl

```
fun foldl f e [] = e
    | foldl f e (x::xs) = foldl f (f(x,e)) xs;
```
This is a `val foldl = fn: ('a * 'b -> 'b) -> 'b -> 'a list -> 'b list`

Can be used to convert any infix operator, such as '+', to a function that takes a pair by preceding it with 'op'. Then can use `foldl` to apply the op. 

Example: 

```
foldl op+ 0 [1, 2, 3]
```
produces `6`.

## @

@ is a built-in infix operator to append one list to another. 

Appending lists: 

```
infixr 5 @;
fun ([] @ ys) = ys
    | (x::xs) @ ys = x::(xs @ ys);
```
Note the recursion in the third line; we append `x` to the front of the result of the combination of the remainder `xs` with `ys`. 

## Accumulating parameters

Move elements one by one from the input list to the accumulating list. 

Sometimes, you need to explicitly give the type to ML. 

```
fun rev2 ([], (y:'a list)) = (([]:'a list), y)
    | rev2 ((x::xs), y) = rev2(xs, x::y);
```
`val rev2 = fn : 'a list * 'a list -> 'a list * 'a list`

The type-checking algorithm has trouble with the types of empty lists.

The first argument to `rev2` is the remaining input, and the second arg is the solution so far. If this is wrapped in an outer function, you get a linear time solution to reversing a list.