---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 4"
date:   2017-01-11
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- context free grammars 
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---

TODO: Read 2.2 to 2.4 in Scott

## Context Free Grammars

REs don't support recursion. For more complex expressions, we specify the language with a grammar using BNF (Backus-Naur Form). BNF allows us to specify context-free-grammars. 

A **grammar** is a tuple ($\Sigma$, N, P, S) where: 

* $\Sigma$ is a set specifying the alphabet of tokens (aka terminal symbols)
* N is the set of non-terminal symbols; variables that denote sets of sentences
* P is a set of productions (substitution rules)
* S is the start symbol where $S \in N$

In general, BNF spec is a set of derivation rules, written as: 

	<symbol> ::= __expression__

EBNF adds \|, *, + from RE to BNF. 

## Non-context Free Grammars

Ex. The rule $\alpha$A$\beta$ ::= $\alpha\sigma\beta$ only allows A to be replaced by $\sigma$ when it appears between $\alpha$ and $\beta$. 

Programming languages are NOT context free, but we use context-free grammars anyway bc it is easier. We handle the context separately. 

## Parsing

While grammars give rules for generating sentences in a language, **parsing** is the process of recognizing the language (and determining its structure). **Parse trees** are a way of representing the structure of a sentence. 

## Ambiguous Grammars

Admits more than one parse tree for a sentence. Sad! Add rules to disambiguate. Or change the language! Ex. Explicitly terminate if statements. 

## Parsing Complexity

There are $O(n^3)$ algorithms for any context-free grammar. For useful subsets of CFG, there are parsers that are linear. We are interested in **LL (left-to-right, leftmost derivation)** top-down grammars. 

[Def](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context-free_grammar#Derivations_and_syntax_trees): A **derivation** of a string for a grammar is a sequence of grammar rule applications that transforms the start symbol into the string. A derivation proves that the string belongs to the grammar's language. 

In a *leftmost derivation*, the next nonterminal to rewrite is always the leftmost. 

An **LR (left-to-right, rightmost derivation)** does bottom-up parsing.