---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 36"
date:   2017-04-07
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- generics
---

## Generics

Subroutines provide a way to provide an operation for a number of different parameter values. Conformant arrays, default parameters, variable number of parameters, e.g., in `C` int foo(int a, ...)`. It often happens that we also need to perform an operation for a number of different parameter types

## Polymorphism

In `ML`, the compiler implements type-safe implicit parametric polymorphism, via structural type equivalence (Hindley-Milner)

Java only allows object types to parameterize generics in their implementation of generics. Ada, C++ allow values of ordinary types, e.g., `vector<int>`, as well. C# follows Java, and treats ordinary types as special case.

## Implementation of generics

In C++, the compiler creates a separate copy of code for each instance. Leads to code bloat. 

In Java, all instances share the same code at runtime. Compiler inserts runtime type casts.

## C++ templates

* generic parameters may take values
* templates may be nested
* in principle, can do arbitrary computation at compile time
* Example of template metaprogramming: generic parameter n to sort routing creating routine that sorts array o fsize n with all loops unrolled
* Expanded then type-checked

## Java Type Erasure

* Replaces all type parameters in generic types with their bounds or Object if the type parameters are unbounded
* Type casts are inserted to preserve type safety
* Generates bridge methods to preserve polymorphism in extended generic types
* C#'s reification replaces the need for type erasure - allows sharing code when necessary
* JVM not initially created with generics in mind

