---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 19"
date:   2017-02-17
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- control flow
---
---
## Value and Reference model of variables, revisited

Functional languages generally employ a reference model for names (a purely functional language has no variables or assignments). In C, which employs a value model, pointers are needed to deal with references. 

## Files and I/O

Handled very differently between languages, usually very difficult

# Chapter 6 - Control Flow - Scott

## Ordering

How to determine what should be done first, second, etc? 

* Sequencing- Statements are to be executed in a specified order, usually in the order they appear in program text
* Selection- a choice is to be made among two or more statements or expressions
* Iteration- A given fragment of code is to be executed repeatedly
* Procedural abstraction - A potentially complex collection of control constructs is encapsulated in a way that allows it to be treated as a single unit, usually subject to parameterization
* Recursion
* Concurrency
* Exception handling and speculation
* Nondeterminacy- Ordering among statements is deliberately left unspecified. All alternatives should lead to a correct result

Precedence is a language design choice; C has 15 levels of precedence for expression evaluation!

## Referential Transparency

*The value of an expression depends only on its referencing environment, not when it is evaluated*. Pure functional languages are referentially transparent. 

## Expressions and statements

Recall: Expressions always produce a value, may or may not have side effects. Statements executed solely for side effects (e.g., assignments).

## Boxing

Automatic conversion between value and reference models

