---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 20"
date:   2017-02-20
category: lecture-notes
keywords:
- orthogonality 
---
---
## Orthogonality

Features can be used in any combination.

Example: 

Algol-orthogonality was major design goal. Expression oriented; no separate notion of statements

```Algol
begin
a := if b < c then d else e; // rhs is expression
a := begin f(b); g(c) end;   // value of rhs is g(c), rhs is a statement though
g(d);						 // return value of g(d) thrown away
2 + 3;                       // value of code block
end
```
Even the entire above block is an expression, and its return value is 5. 

In Java, `b < c ? d : e` is equivalent- returns a value. 

C takes an intermediate approach. 

* distinguishes between statements and expressions
* one class of expression is expression statement, which computes the value of expression and throws it away. 
* assignments can appear in expressions
* in any context that expects a `boolean`, C accepts anything that can be coerced into an `int`

## Other features 

* Combinational assignment operators such as `+=` and `*=`
* Multiway assignment such as `a,b,c := d,e,f`. Allows functions to return multiple values

## Initialization 

Specifying initial value of a variable in its declaration. Initial value of statically allocated variables can be set by compiler.

Orthogonality requires a way to initialize composite types. Only saves time for statically allocated variables. Other initialization is done at runtime. 

## Definite Assignment

Require that a value be "definitely assigned" to a variable before the variable is used in any expression. <i>Every possible control path to an expression must assign a value to every variable in the expression</i>. This is the case in Java and C# for all but local variables in a subroutine. 

Dynamic checks can fail as semantic errors at runtime. Expose some subtle bugs that could exist with compiler supplying default values. Happens in C++.  

## Ordering within expressions

`(a + b) * (c + d)`? Most languages do not specify order, allowing compiler to choose. Java and C# require left-to-right.

## Mathematical Identities

* commutativity is assumed to be safe
* associativity (known to be dangerous)
    * `(a + b) = c` works if `a=maxint` and `b=minint` and `c < 0`
    * `a + (b + c)` does not
* inviolability of parantheses (language RESPEKS parantheses)

## Short circuit evaluation

* `a(x) && b(y)` - can evaluate left to right, and stop if `a(x)` if false
* `a(x) || b(y)` - no point in evaluating `b(y)` if `a(x)` is true
* this is often more efficient
* Changes semantics, e.g., `if (z != null && z.w > 0)` ...
* If subexpressions have side effects, short circuits may not be desireable. Ada does both!

## Sequence points

C, C++ define "sequence points" that **constrain order of evaluation**. Between SPs, order is unconstrained. There are few SPs, which can lead to unpleasant surprises. 
For e.g., 
* At the end of a full expression, terminated usually by ;
* after eval of all fn args in a fn call and before execution of any exprs in the fn body
* after cpying of a rtrnd value and before execution of any exprs outside the fn
* after evaluation of the first exprsn in `a&&b`, `a||b`, `a?b:c`, or `a,b`
* after the init of each base and member in the constructor init list

Example: 

Assume i has value 1 before the expression

	x[i] = i++ + 1

Don't know if we are storing at x[1] or x[2]! 

Example: 

Assume i==1, j==2

	f(i++, j++, i+j)

In C, don't know what gets passed to f in the 3rd parameter. No sequence points constrain the order of evaluation of these args 
