---
layout: post
title:  "PLP: Lecture 8"
date:   2017-01-23
category: lecture-notes
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  TeX: { equationNumbers: { autoNumber: "AMS" } },
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]}
});
</script>

---

## Implementation of variable access

* Most-closely nested rule
* Use static links
* The frame of some subroutine contains a pointer (static link) to the surrounding scope
* Dereference the static chain twice and then apply offset to access scope from calling scope of the immediate calling scope!

## Declaration order

* Is a declaration in a scope valid in the entire scope? Or just in the text following the definition? 
* If a name must be declared before used, then how can we allow recursive types and subroutines?

### Pascal

* Forward references for procedures
* Allow the use of recursive types in definitions with pointers only
* Pointers are fixed size; this + forward referencing allowed for 1-pass compilation

### C, C++

* Differentiate between *declaration* and *definition*
* declaration-introduces name and defines scope
* definition-introduces object to which name is bound
* The declaration is enough to allow you to use the name recursively to define a type

## Decoupling lifetime from visibility

* Single subroutine abstraction-variables are only visible in the subroutine
    * static variables in C
    * `save` in Fortran
* Modules-(package, cluster, namespace)
	* Objects in module are visible to each other
	* Explicit importing/exporting is required to interact with external modules
	* Local/Global modules were used initially. Global modules divided a module into *Definition* and *Implementation* parts. Originally only allowed for 1 instance of the defined object in the module.
	* Turn modules into managers of types-still a separation between the manager for the type and the type itself. Procedures accept the (record) type as a parameter
* Classes-similar to modules except they statically bind procedures to a type
    * Inside the implementation module, use a keyword to refer to this implicit argument, often `self` or `this`

## Independent/Separate compilation

* Independent compilation-can compile different parts of a program independently, but no type checking across compilation units
* Separate-type checking across compilation units
    * Definition module is compiled to produce a symbol file
    * Clients can compile their code w/ symbol file to produce an object file
* Symbol files must remain consistent; common to use keys to match
* Java
    * Symbol files are extracted from class files by the compiler
    * Compatibility checks are performed as part of byte code verification.
